
Ekatmadham
Content Manager

Dashboard
Collection Types

Granthas
Sections
Manthras
Teekas
Articles
Authors
Categories
Single Types

About
Global Settings
C
Chitra Jain

editor

Sign Out

Manthras
Manthras
Individual verse / mantra entries within a Section

Add Manthra
Search manthras...

Chandogya Upanishad

All Sections
Clear filters
Status	Number / Sanskrit	Section	Order	Actions
Chandogya Upanishad(1 mantra)
Live	
Mantra 1.1.1

ओमित्येतदक्षरमुद्गीथमुपासीत । ओमिति ह्युद्गायति तस्योपव्याख्यानम् ॥ १ ॥

Prathama Khanda (khanda)	1	


Edit Manthra
A Manthra is an individual verse or mantra within a Section.

Shloka / Manthra Number *
Mantra 1.1.1
Order (display sequence)
1
Section (optional)
Prathama Khanda (khanda) — Chandogya Upanishad

Selected Section

Prathama Khanda

Type: khanda

Grantha: Chandogya Upanishad

Sanskrit Text (Devanagari)








ओमित्येतदक्षरमुद्गीथमुपासीत । ओमिति ह्युद्गायति तस्योपव्याख्यानम् ॥ १ ॥

English Translation








One should meditate on this syllable 'OM' as the Udgitha; for, one sings (the Saman) beginning with 'OM'. Of this, follows the detailed explanation.

Language of Translation
Select language for translation

Translation in Selected Language










Sanskrit Text (Devanagari)








ओमित्येतदक्षरमुद्गीथमुपासीत — ओमित्येतदक्षरं परमात्मनोऽभिधानं नेदिष्ठम् ; तस्मिन्हि प्रयुज्यमाने स प्रसीदति, प्रियनामग्रहण इव लोकः ; तदिह इतिपरं प्रयुक्तम् अभिधायकत्वाद्व्यावर्तितं शब्दस्वरूपमात्रं प्रतीयते ; तथा च अर्चादिवत् परस्यात्मनः प्रतीकं सम्पद्यते ; एवं नामत्वेन प्रतीकत्वेन च परमात्मोपासनसाधनं श्रेष्ठमिति सर्ववेदान्तेष्ववगतम् ; जपकर्मस्वाध्यायाद्यन्तेषु च बहुशः प्रयोगात् प्रसिद्धमस्य श्रैष्ठ्यम् ; अतः तदेतत् , अक्षरं वर्णात्मकम् , उद्गीथभक्त्यवयवत्वादुद्गीथशब्दवाच्यम् , उपासीत — कर्माङ्गावयवभूते ओङ्कारेपरमात्मप्रतीके दृढामैकाग्र्यलक्षणां मतिं सन्तनुयात् । स्वयमेव श्रुतिः ओङ्कारस्य उद्गीथशब्दवाच्यत्वे हेतुमाह — ओमिति ह्युद्गायति ; ओमित्यारभ्य, हि यस्मात् , उद्गायति, अत उद्गीथ ओङ्कार इत्यर्थः । तस्य उपव्याख्यानम् — तस्य अक्षरस्य, उपव्याख्यानम् एवमुपासनमेवंविभूत्येवंफलमित्यादिकथनम् उपव्याख्यानम् , प्रवर्तत इति वाक्यशेषः ॥

English Translation








This is Adi Shankaracharya’s detailed Bhashya (commentary) on the first verse of the Chandogya Upanishad. Here, he explains the metaphysical and practical reasons why OM is the supreme tool for meditation.

Translation

"One should meditate on the syllable OM as the Udgitha..."

OM is this syllable, the most proximate (nearest) name of the Supreme Self (Paramatman). Indeed, when this name is employed, He (the Supreme Self) becomes pleased, just as a person in the world is pleased when his favorite name is called out.

In this context, the word OM is followed by the particle iti ("thus") to indicate that it is being used as a name (a designator); by this, the syllable is set apart from its role as a mere sound and is recognized in its essential form as a word. Thus, it becomes a Pratika (a symbol or medium) of the Supreme Self, much like a sacred idol (Archa) or image.

It is understood from all the Vedantas (Upanishads) that this syllable is the foremost means for the worship of the Supreme Self, serving both as His name and as His symbolic representation. Its excellence is well-known due to its frequent use at the beginning and end of chanting (Japa), rituals (Karma), and the study of scriptures (Svadhyaya).

Therefore, one should meditate on "this very syllable" (tad-etat-aksharam)—which is of the nature of a letter—and which is called Udgitha because it is a component of the Udgitha chant (in the Sama Veda). One should extend a firm, one-pointed mental flow (Mati) toward this Omkara, which is a component of the ritual and a symbol of the Supreme Self.

The scripture (Shruti) itself provides the reason why the word Omkara is designated by the term "Udgitha": "For, with OM, one begins the singing (Udgayati)." Since one begins the chant with "OM," the word Omkara is synonymous with Udgitha.

"Of this, follows the detailed explanation"—this means an explanation of this syllable’s meditation, its divine glories (Vibhuti), its specific results, and so on. This "detailed explanation" is what now commences (completing the sentence).

Language of Translation
Select language for translation

Translation in Selected Language










Teekas (Commentaries)
Add Entry
No entries yet. Click "Add Entry" to get started.

Word Meanings

Add Word
No word meanings added.

Cancel
Save as Draft
Close